====== Sterilization ======

The world we currently live in presents itself in dichotomies.   Subjects must either be black or white; left or right; positive or negative.  There is never an in between, never a spectrum of growth.  This engages culture in a very grave situation.  How can we live, honestly and courageously, while caging every thought into a predefined cavity?  With the drama of Christianity as our backdrop, we may see that our willfulness, ingenuity, and capacity to grow is written in our genes as the likeness of God.  Our freedom is one of the most central points of our human stature.  So denying this freedom is consonant to denying ourselves as children of God, and in fact denying God!  Unfortunately, our culture almost requires Christianity to fall into tidy, little boxes that will fit into today's niches.  Yet in the very process of condensing Christianity and adapting it to the culture, all its power is lost.  Churning the event of Christ into a cultured standard, on either side - black or white; left or right - effectively sterilizes it.  It becomes mindless, fruitless, weak, feel-good, and political.  It loses its message.

Sterilization seems to be the most appropriate verbiage for this phenomenon.  It evokes a certain sense of cleanliness: "the operating room has been sterilized".  But it also has as a definition: "to make incapable of bearing fruit".  This can happen in one of two ways.  When Christ is fitted into the world as but a small part of it, rather than as the overarching definition of the world, it becomes utterly incapable of growing and bearing fruit.  Conversely, when Christ is seen as the sole focus of our life but //only apart// from the world, it also becomes sterile.  Clean and pure, but with no growth for humanity.  Benedict XVI, in Deus Caritas Est, speaks of this circumstance clearly: "Were this antithesis to be taken to extremes, the essence of Christianity would be detached from the vital relations fundamental to human existence, and would become a world apart, admirable perhaps, but decisively cut off from the complex fabric of human life."   Pulled away from life in either direction kills the power of Christ in our lives.  While we are called to lead a certain life in God, a separation from the world in an effort to live this life is not the Christian way.  The monastics, the most obvious possible counterexample, also engage the world through prayer and work - St. Benedict's "ora et labora".  Had Christ wanted us to overcome our material existence, he would have provided that.  Rather, our humanity is etched out as both material and spiritual beings, and we are called to nurture that connection.  Some of the most important parts of life and Christianity are pretty human.  Birth is messy.  Sex is messy.  Death is messy.  It's part of our humanity.  It should be embraced then as part of our Christianity as well.

We are called to make our entire lives, every single aspect, a harmonious advance towards holiness.  It is a fantastic burden, a seemingly impossible leap towards perfection.  That is why God came down and made himself fully human, to provide us with an example of how to live with such focus.  We must be mindful of our role in God, and abide within it.  But it isn't a superhuman feat; this focus comes from the ordinary circumstances of our lives, not the extraordinary.  Simply living with a knowledge of the presence of God and striving to fulfill His purpose in daily tasks allows the Spirit to reside in us.  Even when we feel we have nothing to give, that our labors are fruitless- they are not, as Christ will give through us.  Our upturned thoughts, centered on Christ, will allow us to maintain our supernatural focus.  Only a natural, worldly focus removes Christianity from our lives.  As St. Josemaria Escriva says, "If you lose the supernatural meaning of your life, your charity will be philanthropy; your purity, decency; your mortification, stupidity; your discipline, a whip; and all your works, fruitless."

This sterilization is often unwittingly applied to the Church and the saints as well.  It is easy to perceive the Church as distinct and apart from everyday life.  The saints especially seem to us an impossible role in the modern world.  How could we possibly be so pious and holy?  Must we give up our life for that existence?  Never would God call us to anything except that which he knows would make us most happy!  Even those living a sequestered existence must live mindful of the world.  In fact, all of us are called to the contemplative life - a life mindful of our place in Christ and the world.  Consider the story of St. Teresa of Avila who shocked one of the other nuns by absolutely devouring a roasted chicken. Imagine the other nun's look of wonder when seeing Teresa with her mouth dripping, her hands ripping meat from the bones.  St. Teresa's response: "When I eat chicken, I eat chicken.  When I pray, I pray."  The essence of the contemplative life is living in the spirit of Christ, and doing our utmost to fulfill His example of perfection.  The saints are examples of this diligence and dedication, they are our calling to live our lives, in whatever manner God is calling us, for Christ and in the world.

In American churches, there is a higher likelihood of finding a majority of women populating the pews.  With our perception of "church", is this any major surprise?  As David Murrow writes, "Church is sweet and sentimental, nurturing and nice.."  The Americanized version of Christianity has, very literally, emasculated itself; a very potent, yet different form of sterilization.  Instead of hard lining the moral fabric of Christian theology, it instead broadens it to the point of being irrelevant.  In the frenzy towards feel-good sermons, the power of the ethic becomes lost in a mist of ambivalent choices.  The moral relativism Benedict warns us of, evinces itself insidiously within walls of worship.  Not through strong, obvious influence, but through the Screwtape's of the world.  In removing the will to cling to a strong belief, a weak belief is involuntarily created, and fades to no belief at all.

Christ himself certainly did not espouse a "nice, feel-good" philosophy.  He presented an entirely different concept to us, a beautiful, wonderful, infinitely good truth.  While Christ stands for us as unlimited love, boundless mercy, and timeless forgiveness, he is also the man who denounced the Pharisees, kicked the moneylenders out of the Temple, and had a trade as a carpenter.  It's often easier to image a divine, unhurt Christ upon the cross, but it is important to remember the blood and pain; the Passion.  The Passion provides the love, power, and eternal worth of the act of Christ.  Insomuch, he presented the truth as it is, unadulterated by cultural or other human effects.  As the Son of God and Son of Man, he presents it as the most authentic authority.  God chose for us an image of himself as Father, and a human authority for us, in his Son, as masculine.  Our human nature as both masculine and feminine respects and understands, at its most fundamental level, this reasoning: it is the solution our nature as the image and likeness of God is most apt to comprehend.

The nature of the priest also clings to the paradigm of Christ.  In the acts of the Sacraments, ordained by Christ, the priest takes on his role, "in persona christi".  During the Mass, the Confession, the Baptism, the Marriage, or any other Sacrament, a priest fulfills the role of Christ.  The Church, in this regard, literally is the Body of Christ.  It's important to understand this as the reason all priests are men.  To fulfill their vocation in the Church, "in persona christi", they take on a definitively masculine role.  Conversely, the intimate union of the Church as the body of believers is the Bride of Christ, a feminine role.  As Benedict states in Deus Caritas Est, "the 'commandment' of love is only possible because it is more than a requirement.  Love can be 'commanded' because it has first been given."  The mystery of ourselves, our masculinity and femininity, is completely wrapped up in the mystery of the Church and Christ.

Emasculation has another connotation- that of giving up or being stripped of authority, beliefs, or meaning.  The moral relativism many cultures are embroiled in creates a large gap between cultural standards and the perhaps more mysterious standards of Christianity.  The most obvious example is the Anglican Church.  While certainly many holy men and women have been a part of the Church of England, the general effect of this split on religious life in England can be seen in this statistic: 43% of people in Britain cannot say what Easter celebrates.  Interestingly, the cause of the split between the Catholic Church and the Church of England was Henry VIII's desire for a divorce to marry another woman.  Beginning with a foundation of effective sterilization, a removal of the power of a Sacrament, it is unsurprising that the Church in England has largely become irrelevant.  This connection may seem distant, but consider more recent examples.  Many churches in America have accepted practices such as abortion, contraceptives, and openly homosexual clergy.  While we are called to thoroughly love our neighbors, it is equally important to plant that love in a solid foundation.  Christ shows us the way, loving completely everyone he meets.  He moves so far as to die on a Cross, a decidedly un-"feel good" love, and calls us to move behind him, towards his example and a more whole humanity.

Our solid foundation, Christ tells us, lies in Peter, and the Church that is built upon it.  The Church, in turn, seeks to practice its vocation in a manner befitting its foundation, Christ.  That is to say, the Church's goal is to promulgate truths about the nature of humanity, in the general case.  It attempts, as a solid cornerstone, to be largely immune, but not insensitive, to the cultural issues of various times and places.  

Perhaps that is why the Church is not in vogue.  It attempts to develop wholly complete and human solutions to complex, often abstract problems.  The current American cultural environment often demands overly simple answers to extraordinarily complex questions, disregarding completely nuances and subtleties often essential to the debate.  Many of these solutions are presented through an imperfect system of government and politics seen as the most proper model of civilization.  This creates an environment of partisanship that both sides enhance by denouncing their opponents supposed shortsightedness.  In reality, today's political or media "sound byte" doesn't have enough room for real answers, so the population remains largely uninformed, or even worse, misinformed.  The church on the other hand devotes pages and pages in attempts to understand and accurately portray issues and provide holistic solutions in the eyes of God.  

As the foundation Christ set for us in the world, that is its calling.  Our calling as members of the Body of Christ, the Bride of Christ, is to be open to the mystery of this foundation, and allow it to work in our lives.