On Sisyphean Processes in the Modern World

The Greek Legacy
who was Sisyphus, what did he do.. we may show its nature specifically by what it is not
"Sisyphus promoted navigation and commerce, but was avaricious and deceitful, killing travellers and guests in violation of the laws of hospitality. From Homer onwards, he was famed as the craftiest of men. When Thanatos, or Death, came to fetch him, Sisyphus put him into chains, so that no-one died till Ares intervened, freed Thanatos, and allowed him to carry Sisyphus off.

However, before Sisyphus died he had told his wife that when he was dead she was not to offer the usual sacrifice. In the underworld he complained that his wife was neglecting him and persuaded Hades to allow him to go back to the upper world and ask her to perform her duty. When he got back to Corinth he refused to return and was eventually carried back to the underworld by Hermes."

"As a punishment from the gods for his trickery, Sisyphus was compelled to roll a huge rock up a steep hill, but before he reached the top of the hill the rock always escaped him and he had to begin again (Odyssey, xi. 593). Accordingly, pointless or interminable activities are often described as Sisyphean. Sisyphus was a common subject for ancient writers and was depicted by the painter Polygnotus on the walls of the Lesche at Delphi (Pausanias x. 31)."

"Sisyphus was a character in Greek mythology who was lauded as one of the cleverest, yet most devious men in history, with a propensity for flouting the traditions of Greek hospitality by murdering his guests. He was eventually condemned after deceiving first Death himself and then Hades, Lord of the Underworld, in order to escape his inevitable demise. As punishment for his audacity, he was sentenced to be blinded and to perpetually roll a giant boulder up a mountain to the peak, only to have it inevitably roll back down the mountain into the valley."

Sisyphus as originally having freedom, abusing that freedom and being confined to a smaller structured "world".   Similarities to the story of Adam, to mankind in general.  The new Adam and the new Eve as humanity's liberation from our Sisyphean fate

Dante - Canto VII

Discrete Practice
effort towards effortlessness
gladwell

Endless vs. Eternal
The Church.. beauty..a desire for ending.. 
natural betterment vs endless rebuilding and re destruction... purpose.

The Rejuvenating Spirit
Similarly, the sacraments do not apply despite their endless nature.. the nature of new beginnings.. starting anew.. freshness 

Various Projections

    The mundane, endless Representation - That Sisyphus never gets anything done.. that his act is repetitious and boring
    most easily seen in corporate and governmental organizations 

    The producing Representation - That Sisyphus does in fact accomplish a task, yet in the process the task itself is undone,     leaving things to be began anew, but without the rejuvenating spirit.  Most applicable to the political machine. 

    The practicing Representation - That Sisyphus does in fact accomplish a task _despite_ the mundane, endless quality of the     work, in that he builds himself up - his ability, his footwork, his coordination, his muscles, etc.. Yet the work in betterment of self     has no outward purpose to work towards, and is therefore void in and of itself. 

Work and Play
that work in its purest form becomes play
that me way perform discrete practice most often for the purposes of success at play rather than work
that this supreme effort produces effortlessness 
Spencer's "Grace is the most efficient movements

Culture and the Church
