Reckoning

get archetypes w/o stereotypes

The Reckoning - Roethke

A man who wants to die.. who wants to lose all his money just so he has an excuse to kill himself, otherwise its a waste.  

Wanting to die vs. being willing to die..
( he once was.. kids died - car accident with the father - too busy checking his blackberry to see the stoplight - , marriage couldn't take the pressure afterwards.. maybe when it happened he was there and wanted to die too, but couldn't save them, and he couldn't live with living? )
How'd the kids died? (riptide off the ocean, he got back, they didn't)  what was their family like?  It was non-existent.. they were immersed in blackberry's and cell phones and emails and laptops (all these forms of communication, and nobody really said anything..)  he was a high ranking executive for a tech firm, her an investment banker?  Played in poker tourney's on the side (how busy?  look at professions)  Poker as a hobby makes sense.  Spent all their time adding income, so it makes sense that he would see losing all of it as the end of the world.  Definitely need a first scene in the casino where the guy is pissed he won.  ("Hey, Blackjack!"  "Son of a bitch!")

where'd the wife go off to? divorce settlement was easy.. he took $100k and gave her the rest.. (later she.. ?)  She goes back to her parent's small town?  Retires from her job.. finds a simpler life and wants to live it, but he's unwilling to.. so she sends letters to his ex-best friend, who is the holder of his money.. he dutifully forwards them on to his hotel.  He receives them and packs them away in a small box, so we know he receives a letter once a month or so, but we dont' find out for awhile what it is..

goes to vegas and plays the chancy games... incredible winning streak over months.. lives in a suite.. goes to shows.. lives the high life, but is internally ascetic.. has the money but doesn't care (there's something about miserliness that is just as contemptible as greed)
Where does the money go?  Keeps upgrading his suite, keeps going to shows.. starts to go out in the streets and gives his money away to homeless, hookers, etc... why doesn't he just give it all away and kill himself?  Wants the pity.. needs to feel totally downtrodden and worthless if he's gonig to take his life.
he originally came to vegas to waste all his money and take his life, but somehow his winning got normal
Why vegas?  Lost in Translation style immersion in the glitz and lights but not really caring or being swayed by it.  Where he'd go to retire.. a coastal village in Oregon, similar to the one he grew up in on the Carolina coast.  Quiet, content.. think Shawshank (more meat!)

"You figured that?  You figured that.  That's an odd sort of calculation."  Says the stripper character, she was once a promising math student.  Ran away from her problems, had an abortion, thought going back was too easy.  "I had my life set out before me.  I never knew why I was supposed to be happy.  It just seemed too easy after that.  So, I came here.  I met some people and ended up dancing.  I always liked dancing."

When i was a kid.. my grandfather told me that the secret to life was livin'

"the only thing more pitiable than a suicide is an attempted suicide.."

used to be a great poker player. doesn't play now because there's "too much skill" only the chance games.  Maybe tries poker once... for the memory (the harmonica in Shawshank)

befriends and gets an occasional lapdance from a stripper nearby.. (she always offers him a blow even though she secretly doesn't turn tricks like the other girls)
but eventually he finds out his old best friend, a perpetual bachelor, gets married, he goes to one of the other girls to get the bj.. his usual girl gets hurt by this.. (odd morals in everything - even the nasty parts of life get played out into some sort of structure)
more on relationship with the stripper?

what other friends at the casino?  the blackjack dealer.. the old woman at the slots.. the card sharks (they know him).. the calculator (reduces everything to numbers)... and the priest he meets at the cathedral, or wherever.. see religious quotes and conversations below.  Priest loves wine.. "but" he says, "you can either drink wine, or wine can drink you."  All the symbolism of the vine and water to wine, etc.
more experiences.. watching others get caught into the ritz and glamour.. little wedding chapel.. fountains at ??.. the colonade, etc.

evntually.. he realizes he doesn't want to die.. (some event?!).. goes down to the casino just like always.. within 5 minutes his bankroll is busted.  "guess its time to start livin'".  Heads over to the poker table to make some back and go find his estranged exwife.  stripper goes to her grandmother to get her son?

Other dialogue:
"Priest, how can you be so forgiving of me, even though you know my most hidden secrets.  Even when I hate myself?"
"Because that's what we are called to do, to follow the example of what Christ did for us first.  Forgive.  Everybody is capable of somehow forgiving certain people.  Only one man was capable of forgiving everything of everyone.  He died for that.  And its because of your sins thatI love you.. because thats part of your humanity."


"Raise hell.  That's an interesting phrase isn't it?  Its one of those things we say 10 times a day and pay no attention to.  But its rather chilling.  think about it, the resurrection of evil.  It should induce more fear than it does, simply because its commonplace."

"The hardest thing to find is a black cat in a dark room.  Especially if there is no cat."
Tell me, what's the difference between a mystery and a mystique?  Truth vs. a facade..   Christianity is a black car in a brilliantly lit room with no other distractions.  But we have to be willing to see the cat.. something here, what the hell is it?

"Oh my God.."
"Yes.  He's right there."

The commonality of it has removed the sensation of power inherent to it.

"Enough people say bad things you start to believe it."
"The bad stuff is easier to believe."

"If I forget, I had a really good time tonight."

The old man somehow..
"The man idled along, slowly opening his umbrella as he walked.  Several busy passersby stared at him curious about the cautionary habits of an old man.  Several moments later, the sky opened up producing sheets of rain.  The old man let the smallest trace of a smile pass over his face, as he watched the other pedestrians scurry for safety with Wall Street Journals over their heads, hoping in vain to cover their fancy clothing."

A moment of clarity regarding life.. a dangerous situation helping to bring out the true desires of the heart..
"I hadn't yet decided whether i hold the internal reality or the external reality to be the paramount of the two.  I suppose it seems a rather complex question to be considering when you have a blade at your throat, but when you're faced with such an edgy situation, it requires that you comem to a fairly decisive answer.  So, you either choose to let your faith dictate your actions, or to let your actions dictate your faith."









